
 The Homeric epics were crucial texts in the education of Greek speakers in antiquity. The importance of the epics led to the prominence and proliferation of glossographic material, including lexica, paraphrases, scholia, and lexical glosses. These texts acted as study aids and references for teachers, students, and general readers of the texts.[1] The paraphrases present a special branch of this corpus because they attempt not only to define difficult or obscure words, but also to recast the syntax into less complex prose. Debate surrounds the precise nature of the paraphrases, but the predominant opinion holds that they were pre-existing glosses connected into a continuous work.[2]  Although the coincidence of these lexical glosses, and other parts of the glossographic tradition with the paraphrases, particularly the one attributed to Michael Psellos, is significant and striking,[3] there are serious divergences. The differences suggest that the paraphrases are not just a “review” of the glosses, but, rather, that they hold additions or variations that offer an alternative and valid parallel to the standard collection of glosses. This paper will present a review of past scholarship on the paraphrases and then present examples from the text of the paraphrase to elucidate its argument.
 
 
The texts are commented on by a variety of sources, including grammatical, historical, mythographic, and philological scholia; individual word glosses; and continuous prose paraphrases. As can be seen in the various manuscripts, the scribe put these scholiastic and glossographic materials in different and distinct locations on the page and in relation to the text, as an examination of various manuscripts would demonstrate. These different locations are suggestive of content and source. The mise-en-page cannot be discounted for a purely textual reading. Although these texts are in certain ways distinct, overlap and agreement among them suggest a certain degree of continuity, which begs for a holistic reading.


Scholia and scholiastic material present both a meta-literature and a genre of its own. They exist to comment on pre-existing authors and works, but by their existence they constitute their own style. Within their texts, they preserve ancient scholarship on even older works and present the understanding receive by several generations of critics.[4] Recent scholarship, particularly by Dickey, Montanari, and Nünlist, has worked to elucidate the meaning and style behind the prose of these commentators. Within these contemporary studies, the texts available to ancient scholars have been suggested, and their interests in the works have been revealed.[5]  These studies have also illuminated the variety of sources used and quoted by the ancient critics. Because of the breadth of the corpus, the question of how to read it arises. That is to say, there remains the question of what portions of the vast body of work are to be read with each other and with the text itself. Montanari makes the argument for a contextual reading, “We will define a corpus of scholia as an exegetic corpus variorum, designed to be made up in an orderly way alongside or around the text commented upon.”[6] Scholia that appear together should be read together and not necessarily as separate registers. As Montanari suggests, the ancient critics were working with a particular instantiation of the text, both of the work and of the scholiastic/glossographic material.


        	Contemporary scholarship on scholia and generally scholiastic material has tended to separate the scholia both from each other and from their context. To some degree, this decision has been a practical one. A scholar can only work on so much, so choices must be made. Access to the primary sources has been limited, so producing a readable text, again, requires certain pieces to be the focus of study. Composite texts of scholia, such as the editions of Hartmut Erbse and Helmut van Thiel, have offered access to texts culled from a spectrum of manuscripts that otherwise would have been inaccessible to all but the most advanced scholars.[7] The traditional approach is not, however, without problem. The approach treats scholia as stable texts, so that spurious material is winnowed out. Because the ultimate point of these texts were as commentaries and reading aids, they were susceptible, more than other texts, to introductions and subtractions, based on the needs and opinions of the scribe. Nonetheless, the manuscripts have not read as artifacts, preserving one compilation of texts. The various groups of scholia are broken up based on modern analyses and classification, without much regard for the tradition of transmission.[8] The separation and re-integration create problems for proper contextual readings. The various materials are integrated on the page of manuscripts, so that they can be read together. Although the volume of text has been prohibitive in achieving this sort of Gesamtwerk, the total reading offers the scholiastic material in their optimal context. 	
Although the commentary material falls into several strains, this paper compares a set of lexical glosses, the definitions given in the Lexicon Homericum of Apollonius Sophistes, and the paraphrase of Michael Psellos.[9] The lexical glosses present some of the oldest commentary on the Iliad, especially in the form of glosses or Worterklärungen.[10]  The last recension of those texts is supposed to have occurred sometime in the tenth century, according to Ernst Maas,[11] so the scholia, as they stand now, comprise a text coming only decades before the paraphrase. The interlinear glosses from the Marciana 454, Allen’s Venetus A, are here as a point of comparison. Because these glosses come from a tenth century manuscript, composed in Constantinople, and represent a compendium of some the most extensive commentary available, it was reasonable to use this as a point of comparison. Because the manuscript’s commentary is so extensive, it would contain the most necessary explanatory notes.[12] The Lexicon of Apollonius Sophistes, which dates from the first century AD.[13] The paraphrase was composed sometime in the eleventh century and is attributed to the Byzantine polymath Michael Psellos.[14]


Although the works of Michael Psellos have been partially published since Leo Allatius’ edition of the Diatriba in 1634, his Homeric paraphrase has never been published in full.[15]  Erwinius Wassenbergh printed an edition in 1783, along his edition of scholia. Following this publication, the much used paraphrase of Immanuel Bekker, based largely on the codex Parisinus 2690, was printed in 1827 as an Appendix to the Scholia in Iliadem.[16] A problem with the 1827 publication, however, is that the Parisian codex had significant gaps which were filled by using other paraphrases that were not necessarily part of the Psellos family.[17] Although Arthur Ludwich noted the issue of Bekker’s paraphrase in his 1883 Aristarchs Textkritik, it still remains the only attempt at a complete text of the Psellos paraphrase. For this paper, a transcription of the Psellos paraphrase created from manuscript Ω.I.12 (Allen’s E4, which is called in the catalogue Escorialensis graecus 513[18]) has be used in place of the standard Bekker paraphrase because, as Spooner notes, Bekker diverges from Psellos.[19] Vassis concurs, “The paraphrase of Rhapsodies B-E of codex stands in no agreement with the Psellos-Paraphrase.”[20]


Ludwich printed around seventy lines from four different paraphrases, the Gaza, Moschopulos, Psellos, and Venetus A, in order to determine their relation.[21] In his analysis, he determined that they all share important commonalities and that the Psellos paraphrase holds the earliest date of composition. While Psellos is the oldest, Ludwich maintains that all four come from a pre-existing body of glosses because ultimately the corpus he reviewed is larger than all the known redactions of the Psellos paraphrase.[22] He proposes further, “they belonged in the past to an older (now lost) forerunning Homer-translation, which the compiler of the scholia vulgata excerpted.”[23] Vassis alternatively suggests that the part of the Bekker paraphrase B-E was “supra-glossed” from D.[24] Spooner suggests that books B-E of Bekker’s paraphrase, which he uses as his text for Psellos, are closer to the D-scholia because they are not part of the Psellos tradition.[25] It is not entirely evident how he arrives at this conclusion because the Psellos paraphrase is remarkably similar to the D-scholia, both in what it glosses and what it lacks. It seems that he does go too far in his differentiation of the two texts. Regardless of Spooner’s conclusion about their similarity, his clear observation that Bekker’s text is a composite, with parts from texts other than that of Psellos, provides reason to base this comparison on a newly prepared text.
The Homeric Lexicon of Apollonius Sophistes serves as the “key source of information on ancient understandings of Homer’s vocabulary and how Homer was read in antiquity.”[26] The main text used is that, again, of Immanuel Bekker from 1833. His edition is based on the single surviving manuscript of the Lexicon, Coislinianus 345, which is in fact an epitome of the text. Various papyri have since been found and published, the largest of which was edited by Albert Henrichs and Wolfgang Müller in 1976. Reference is also made to the lexicon of Hesychius, from the fifth or sixth century, because it preserves some citations and glosses lost elsewhere.[27]


The D-scholia or scholia vulgata, rather than a precisely defined and intentional publication, are a Byzantine compilation that encompasses many forms of Homeric scholia.[28] The chief among them are word glosses and mythological scholia which are taken from various lexica, the so-called glossographoi, and other lexical commentaries. Henrichs determines their defining characteristic to be the “undemanding simplicity of their explanations.”[29] They appear frequently as interlinear glosses, as is seen especially in the Marciana 454, Allen’s Venetus A.[30] The D-scholia have been subject to criticism because they are a less homogenous set than other glossographic materials and because their collection was based in part on a misattribution to Didymus, the first century Homeric scholar and grammarian.[31] Nevertheless, that set of scholia does provide a common and widespread mode of understanding the reception and interpretation of the Homeric epics, especially from the sixth century forward.[32] The last redaction of D “must be placed in the 6th century.”[33] As a result, they were excluded from Hartmut Erbse’s edition of the scholia, but they have been most extensively published by Helmut van Thiel. Wilhelm Dindorf does include them in his edition of the scholia vetera where he names them interlinearia glossemata, interlinear glosses, which occur throughout the Marciana 454. Because of the wide range of sources, including the Marciana 454, from which the scholia minora are drawn, it does not seem unreasonable to use that manuscript as a point of comparison of the extensiveness of the commentary and similarity of provenance to the Psellos paraphrase.


Scholars have found assigning sources to all three of these texts to be challenging. Ioannis Vassis reports from Ludwich that Psellos created his paraphrase from D-scholiastic material,[34] and van der Valk goes further to suggest that the paraphrase is a complete review of the scholia corpus.[35] The contention of this paper is that while the paraphrase draws heavily from the scholia, it is not simply a “review” of them, but it also demonstrates innovation that offers an additional and sometimes alternative source by which to understand the text and its reception. Forsman, the first to pose the question of sources, considered that the chief source for the Lexicon of Apollonius was a gloss collection (Glossensammlung), which was derived from the commentaries of Aristarchus,[36]  but this notion Erbse, based on a chronology of other commentators using similar texts, refutes.[37] Erbse, following Gattiker and others, postulates that the scholia vulgata and the Lexicon both come from a common source under the name of Didymus that existed for a long time before the text of Apollonius.[38] According to van der Valk, Apollonius Sophistes took from Apion, so “the period between the two is too short to assume the intermediary of D. So it is more sensible that D follows Apollonius Sophistes.[39]


A great number of the words are not in fact changed from the original poem to the prose paraphrase. Generally, it appears that only the “unusual poetic words [are translated] into more common ones.”[40] This notion tends to be true, so changes and differences in the glosses prove to be all the more significant. Individual glosses have obvious value, but “the paraphrase remains important because...it [the style of the text] was still much more complex than the Koine, and so it needed explanation.”[41] The continuous paraphrases seek not only to explicate difficult vocabulary, but also to elucidate complex syntactical units. The benefit of the paraphrase is that it gives the context of the word and provides continuity in the progression of the text.
 
 
        	“The scholia are eclectic compilations from a variety of sources, many of ancient origin, which have been added to and ‘improved’ upon by the Byzantine commentators.”[42] The paraphrase is, then, of an already chimerical nature. The macaronic content is enhanced by the fact that this set of “scholia” is culled largely from a Hellenistic lexicon and then compiled by a Byzantine scholar.
        	“Even a high-level Byzantine language form can be at best no more than a reflection of how the ancient language was perceived in the Byzantine language community.”[43]
        	“Thus, as in earlier classicizing literature, there is no direct imitation of classical models and the actual classical usage is not decisive.”[44]
        	
        	
        	“We may wonder for whom metaphrases were meant. Browning (1978:125) thinks of a common readership for low-register and metaphrastic literature, a readership ‘not educated in the classicizing language.’ Sevcenko (1982:228-9), on the other hand, points out that it is people with the highest education who seem to be reading these texts. He also argues (1982:226-7) for a system of a equivalences common to the new versions of different texts, i.e., an agreement as to what word or phrase should be used to represent a particular word or phrase of the classicizing language. ”[45]
The text of the Lexicon Homericum is straightforward: the edition of Bekker was used. As discussed above, this text was based off of the only extant manuscript of this work of Apollonius, the Coisilianus 345, which is itself an epitome. Although new papyri have been found, none, as far as the author can tell, have anything substantial to add for this particular project. The interlinear glosses are taken directly from photographic images of the Venetus A manuscript and were compared to the edition of Dindorf.[46]


The text of the paraphrase requires a slightly more involved explanation. The two texts used come from the Codex Marcianus 841 and the Escorialensis graecus 513 (Ω.I.12). Transcriptions were made directly from photographic images of the manuscripts.[47] The Escorial manuscript is written in an eleventh century hand,[48] and the Marcianus text comes probably from the fifteenth century.[49] The paraphrases in both of these belong to what Vassis names the “second family” of the paraphrase.[50] Of the eighteen manuscripts deemed important for the reconstruction of the paraphrase text, these two represent major exempla for the second family.[51] Moreover, Ludwich states that he would have liked to have consulted the Ω.I.12 because of its early composition.[52] Ω.I.12 lacks 481; 606, and 607, and the Marciana 841 lacks 481 and 482. All seven hundred forty-six lines of book 15 are present, except for the following. According to Allen, line 15.481 lacks in the vulgate version of the text.[53]  No comment is made about the other lines.


        	The relationship among the Lexicon, scholia minora, and the paraphrase is evident from their similarity in word usage. Haslam suggests that the scholia minora are frequently connected to particular forms in particular contexts.[54] The lexical entries have also been shown to be aligned with particular usages because they take both form and meaning from the particular quotation. Within the paraphrase, however, the words take the form from its usage in the text. Because the glosses are linked to particular positions, differences among the individual glosses, the Lexicon, and the paraphrase for the same word at the same point offers insight into a parallel and alternative nuance.  Because the Lexicon and interlinear glosses are traditionally linked to their particular location in the text, a close reading of the paraphrase is critical not only for where the other two sources exist, but even more so for where they do not because it proposes the connotation of the word in every line and context.
        	
        	
Ultimately the paraphrase presents the text of the Iliad in prose. Although difficult or uncommon words are glossed in the D-scholia, both the glossed and un-glossed words form part of the prose text. Generally, the order of the line is preserved, and most often the same particles are also maintained.[55] In these cases, the changes to the original vocabulary are minimal, and they are in fact not even noted in the Lexicon or glosses. When one compares the text of the paraphrase to that of the Iliad itself, one sees that the word choice can remain largely the same.
This can be seen, for example, in line one.
15.1 	Iliad: αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ διά τε σκόλοπας καὶ τάφρον ἔβησαν
        	Paraphrase: ἐπειδὴ δὲ τούς τε σκόλοπας καὶ τὴν τάφρον διέβησαν
It is typical for the articles to be added before the nouns, and it is not uncommon for αὐτάρ to be transformed to δέ.[56] Here, as is frequent, the major content words remain unchanged. Fittingly enough, these lines, too, do not receive glosses in the D-scholia. The predilection to maintain word order and vocabulary does suggest the origin of these texts as reading aids.
In certain instances, the Lexicon defines a single word multiple times with various synonyms. In line 15.2, δάμεν is given in the paraphrase by ἀπέθανον[57] and then in 15.476,  the Homeric δαμασσάμενοί becomes καταπονήσαντες.[58] The Lexicon glosses this Homeric verb at three entries, twice as δεδμήατο and once as δμῶες.[59] The glosses offered are ὑποτεταγμένοι, κατεσκεύαστο; κατεσκευομένοι; and ὑποτετάχθαι. Furthermore, the entry in the Lexicon of Hesychius, which often preserves glosses lost in the Coisilianus epitome, still does not present the Psellos gloss. Earlier in the Marciana 454, ἀνῃρέθησαν, which seems to offer senses of both verbs, is used.[60] The change in the gloss in the paraphrase offers a stronger difference because of the similarity between the rest of the original epic line and the paraphrase. Although they are clearly synonymous, the maintenance of the single gloss throughout the text is suggestive of the conservative nature of the glosses. The stark difference between the two suggests the importance in nuance offered by a reading inclusive of the paraphrases, even and especially where it diverges from the standard gloss of a word or line.


One of the most striking divergences occurs in the different glosses for the various forms of the verb φοβέομαι. This verb gives difficulty because its Homeric meaning is “to flee,” while by the Classical period it means to “to fear.”[61] At all of its appearances in the Marciana 454, it receives a gloss derived from either φεύγω or διώκω.[62] It also receives the phrase εἰς φυγὴν ἐτράπησαν, which appears in the paraphrase at 15.15. The Lexicon as well defines φόβος with φυγῆς.[63] When it appears in the Psellos paraphrase, however, it is defined first ἐκπεπληγμένοι in line 15.4 and then εἰς τὴν φυγὴν ἔτρεψε in line 15.15. At line 15.637, as is common throughout the text of the paraphrase, ἐφοβήθησαν is used as a gloss of ἐφόβηθεν. The word, changed for syntax, is used to gloss itself. This does perhaps suggest the tendency, especially of Apollonius, to fit the archaic word into its contemporary meaning.[64] Because of the partial adherence to the seemingly standard stock of glosses, the use of ἐκπεπληγμένοι at 15.4 offers a different view, which is not supplied elsewhere. Even Hesychius, who offers additions to the Lexicon, offers nothing else.[65] The meaning in the paraphrase here preserves the notion of fright, so it seems that at this particular point it is suggested that the meaning of the verb actually does have its later sense that does appear elsewhere.


In the Marciana 454 book 15, ἐείσατο is glossed twice with the same verb, first as ἐπῆλθεν, then as ἐπῆλθον.[66]  Since they are glossed using the same verb in different contexts, it is evidently the standard gloss and not just a simple indication of one meaning. The paraphrase, in contradistinction, does not use ἔπηλθον, but uses φάνη and ὥρμησαν, respectively, to explicate the Homeric word. Both of these are used elsewhere as interlinear glosses and in particular 1t 2.215. The close correspondence elsewhere throughout the text strongly suggests here that an important alternative understanding exists to a richer comprehension of the text.[67] The Lexicon attests the meaning of ἐφάνη by giving the exemplum from 2.215, “ἀλλ᾽ ὅ τι οἱ εἴσαιτο γελοίϊον Ἀργείοισιν.”[68] The testimony of the Lexicon, taken with other pieces of textual evidence, does suggests that the mutations found in the paraphrase are not entirely invented, but still preserve part of the glossographic tradition from other branches. For Apollonius, ἐείσατο seems to have been an exceptionally difficult word because he offers four separate glosses for the same lexis.


In line 15.104, the paraphrase offers ὀργιζόμεθα in place of μενεαίνομεν. The Marciana 454 present both ὀργιζόμεθα and προθυμούμεθα.[69]  The Lexicon concurs by offering προθυμούμεθα, which is also the gloss offered in the Marciana 454 manuscript in its interlinear gloss.[70] The difference suggests an intentional choice that Psellos made in creating the paraphrase. Although the majority holds one reading, the Venetus A is an exceptionally important text for the preservation of the common text and reading. As a result, it is important to take note of divergences between it and other readings.[71]
Glosses are frequently noted for particular lexical instances, as noted earlier, and, as a result, they tend to maintain a strong attachment to these words. In the case of γνωτόν, in every other discernible instance, it appears with a form of the gloss ἀδελφόν, and this strong connection is maintained even in the Lexicon wherein again the signification of ἀδελφόν is given, even though it cites the passage 15.350, where a significant difference lies in the paraphrase.[72] Hesychius even offers nothing else new for the matter of this word. The paraphrase offers a distinctly vastly different reading of the text, however. Here the text reads συγγενές καὶ συγγενίδες, which clearly presents a more general understanding of the word because this permits for the wider understanding of ἀδελφόν as simply “kinsfolk,” not particularly as brother and then in feminine, sister. Even though the Lexicon cites the passage in 15 as an example of the plural in different genders, only in the paraphrase do both receive a gloss. It is especially significant that this passage is cited because it is the only place in the Iliad where both genders appear together and in the plural.[73]  Further, earlier in the book γνωτόν was indeed glossed as ἀδελφόν, so the connection between the texts is clearly established. The marked change suggests that the composer of the paraphrase understood an additional stratum of text that was not previously present.


Common words, as suggested earlier, provide the opportunity to look comparatively at the usage of glosses. The verb ἀμείβετο appears five times in book 15 alone, and it receives a gloss of some form of either ἀποκρίνω or ἀνταποκρίνω in each instance, except for the last, at which it receives ὑπαλλάσσει.[74] The Lexicon is consonant with this final usage and offers two different glosses, ἀνταποδιδόναι and ἐναλλάσσειν , the latter of which is clearly related to the paraphrase’s gloss closely.[75] The choice here demonstrates the fact that glosses are linked to particular usages because it offers the less frequent meaning of the lexis. As a result, reading the paraphrase together with the other two commentaries is of especial benefit here. If it were not, the more usual sense of a verbal, rather than physical, exchange could be obscured.	
When Arthur Ludwich contended that the D-scholia and paraphrase each represent a branch of an Ur-source, bifurcated around the tenth century,[76] he moved forward the notion of the intimate relation between these commentary texts. This paper has tried to demonstrate that this relation provides more than a continuous replication, but also offers a parallel and sometime alternative understanding of the text.[77] The paraphrase genre arose in order to facilitate the widespread reading of a text that was in a style and language that had become increasingly more challenging.[78] The derivation and genre of the paraphrase necessitated the differences in vocabulary, which represent more closely the nuances in the text. Although the paraphrases represent the longer glossographic tradition, they also form their own literary genre.  They required variation and explication of the text not needed in the lexical reading aids of the scholia. This paraphrase and others like it cannot be undervalued precisely because of their differences from the standard lexical commentaries. These variants give important clarification to distinctions that are lost or obscured in other parts of the glossographic tradition.


            	A majority of the particles remains constant through the text. This reflects the consistency, or perceived continuity, of particles. This continuity may also reflect the tendency of the grammarians to maintain the meaning of words as much as possible. Even still, the number of changes in the particles does indicate the general awareness that the meaning of the words, in particular certain particles, does change.
An obvious change is the disappearance of γέ throughout the text.[79]
Sophocles’ Lexicon (1870)
δέ – strengthening particle after relatives (347).
ἐπειδάν – with aor. indic. Or aor. opt. 2) Because = διότι with the indicative
 (494).
ἐπειδή = διότι since, because
        	The distinguishing difference between the Psellos paraphrase, or any paraphrase for that matter, and typical interlinear glosses is the connected nature of the text. Glosses become prose not only by the fullness of text, but also by the presence of particles that connect the text into coherent ideas. The text of Psellos paraphrase offers a remarkable level of retention of the Homeric particles. There are of course changes. These will be noted in this part of the paper.
The particle δέ often signifies itself in the paraphrase, but in other instances it represents several other contrastive particles. From the very first line, one sees that it signifies the conjunction αὐτάρ. So too in line 45, 113, 134, 147, 241 (ατάρ), .
 
“The change of sense from “except (that)” to “but” is most apparent where πλήν is construed with a finite verb or where we feel that a finite verb must be supplied.”[80] Classical usage introduces an exception, while Hellenistic usage has it as an adversative or progressive particle.
Λοιπόν is an inferential or progressive particle that still retains its Classical functional of a temporal adverb.[81] Emphatic particles, on the other hand, become less common in Hellenistic prose, but I am not prepared to call that process simply a decline.[82]


[1] Renner 311.
[2] Spooner 16 n.77. This opinion was proposed to some extent by Ludwich and continued more recently by Gattiker and by Spooner.
[3] Helmut van Thiel sums up the point well: “Berührungen mit den D-Scholien sind vermerkt” (van Thiel ZPE 132 p. 29). For a longer discussion of the “Geschichte der Sammlung” see van Thiel 5-8.
[4] Montanari vii, “ancient scholarship,” which flourished on account of the need to conserve, interpret and study the works of the great authors of the past: textual criticism and exegesis on the one hand (i.e. text conservation and interpretation in the strict sense) and the study of linguistic phenomena on the other (vocabulary, grammar, rhetoric).
[5] Montanari viii, What is thereby highlighted is the central importance of the relation between the library artefact and the text as an object of editing, that is to say, between on the one hand the craftsman's practices, aimed at correcting, in a copy, that which was held to be wrong (often by means of comparison with the antigraph or with other copies), and on the other hand, the rise of a philological practice seeking to emend the text of a work, in which case it was the text itself that was held to be unsatisfactory due to errors that had crept in over time and had been handed down through tradition. Finally, the framework thus reconstructed allows reflection on the nature of the readings attributed to the Alexandrian grammarians.
[6] Montanari 107.
[7] Erbse. Scholia Graeca in Homeri Iliadem, Berlin: de Gruyter, 1969–1983. Van Thiel. Scholia D in Iliadem. Cologne, 2000.
[8] One might consider van Thiel’s edition of D-scholia, wherein both mythographic scholia and lexical glosses are included together, even though in the manuscript sources, the mythographic are included alongside the traditional scholia vetera.
[9] There is doubtless a connection between the D and the Lexicon, as observed by Gattike 50, daß nur zwischen der D-Scholien und dem Lexikon des Apollonius ein direkter und unmittelbarer Zusammenhung besteht.” Furthermore, Henrichs considers each of these a source in his understanding of the scholia minora (101).
[10] Dickey 20.
[11] Gattiker 7.
[12] Allen 158.
[13] Der kleine Pauly 451. The one surviving manuscript of the Lexicon, the Coislianus 345, is dated to around the early tenth century (Haslam I 2). Reference is made on occasion to the later lexicon of Hesychius because preserves on occasion entries lost in the surviving manuscript of Apollonius’ text.
[14] Moore 463.
[15] Moore 9.
[16] Vassis 43.
[17] Ludwich 486. “Die laut S. 811 in der Hauptsache auf dem Cod. Parisinus 2690 beruht; nur wo dieser lückenhaft ist, hat Bekker anderweitig Hilfe gesucht, z.B. für den Schiffskatalog bei Wassenbergh, der die beiden ersten Bücher der Ilias mit Paraphrase aus einer Amsterdamer Handschrift herausgegeben hatte.“ Vassis 66-69. Interestingly, this manuscript, too, lacks the Catalogue of Ships.
[18] This transcription has been prepared from images made available through the Homer Multitext Project. 
[19] Spooner 31.
[20] Vassis 1991 224. Die Paraphrase der Rhapsodien B-E von cod. G steht in keinem Zusammenhang mit der Psellos-Paraphrase.
[21] Ludwich 512.
[22] Ludwich 515-516, „sind jene Scholien auf ihrem Gebiet reichhaltiger als alle mir bekannten Redactionen der Psellos-Uebersetzung zusammengenommen.“
[23] “Sie ehemals einer älterer (jetzt verlorenen) fortlaufenden Homer-Übersetzung angehörten, die der Compilator der Vulgärscholien [D-scholia] excerpierte.”
[24] Spooner 32.
[25] Spooner 167.
[26] Dickey 25.
[27] Henrichs and Müller 28, “Der Vergleich dieser Papyri mit der Apolloniostradition im Codex Marcianus des Hesych einerseits und im Codex Coislinianus andererseits wirft neues Licht auf die frühesten Überlieferungsstufen dieses Lexikons.”
[28] Henrichs 99.
[29] Henrichs 99, “Das besondere Kennzeichen der Scholia Minora . . . ist die anspruchlose Schlichtheit ihrer Erklärungen: Sie bestehen im Grundstock aus Interpretamenten.”
[30] Henrichs 99-100.
[31] Henrichs 99 and 114.
[32] See chart on Henrichs 114. He suggests that the scholia minora are the source for every major commentary and lexicon from the 5th BC forward. Further, he proposes that the so-called D-scholia are best considered a compilation of the scholia minora and Lexicon of Apollonius.
[33] Van der Valk 204.
[34] Vassis 11-12, Er hält es für wahrscheinlicher, daß Psellos aus den D-Scholien geschöpft hat, von welchen er wiederum vermutete, daß sie aus der Auflösung einer fortlaufenden, uns nicht erhaltenen Paraphrase stammen, als daß Paraphrase und Scholien auf eine gemeinsame Quelle zurückgehen.
[35] Vassis 11-12.
[36] Erbse 407.
[37] Erbse 408.
[38] Gattiker 50.
[39] Van der Valk 206.
[40] Schironi 412.
[41] Schironi 427.
[42] Valiavitcharska  240. 
[43] Wahlgren 527.
[44] Wahlgren 534.
[45]Wahlgren 537.
[46] These images were made available by the Homer Multitext project.
[47] Again, these were made available by the Homer Multitext project.
[48] Vassis 68.
[49] Vassis 111.
[50] Vassis 217.
[51] Vassis 181, Achtzehn Codices, d.i. die Hälfte der Hss. mit der Psellos-Paraphrase, sind, wie weiter untergezeigt wird, unabhängig voneinander entstanden und müssen als Primärzeugen für  die Rekonstruktion des ursprünglichen Textes unserer Paraphrase herangezogen werden.
[52] Ludwich 508.
[53]Allen II 66.
[54] Haslam I 29.
[55] Thanks for this point must be given to Mark de Kreij of Heidelberg, who very generously shared his notes for a talk given at Lausanne, entitled “Genavensis Gr. 44. Une comparaison linguistique entre l’Iliade et la paraphrase,” December, 2013.
[56] Cf. l. 15.45 in the paraphrase, “σοὶ δὲ καὶ ἐκείνω ἐγὼ συμβουλεύσαιμϊ” and in l. 61, “αἵτινες νῦν αὐτὸν καταπονοῦσι κατὰ τὰς διανοίας τοὺς δὲ ἕλληνας.”
[57] Line 15.2 in paraphrase, “φεύγοντες· πολλοὶ δὲ ἀπέθανον ὑπὸ ταῖς τῶν ἑλλήνων χερσὶν”
[58] Line 15.476 in paraphrase, μὴ δὴ χωρὶς κακοπαθείαν καταπονήσαντες λάβοιεν.
[59] Bekker 57, 1 and 18 and 59, 19.
[60] Dindorf 331:12.14.
[61] Liddell, Scott, Jones. 
[62] Dindorf 332:12.46; 334:12.432; 335:13:467; and 340:21.267.
[63] Bekker 164.8 “Ἀρίσταρχος σεσημείωται ὅτι συνήθως φόβος ἐπὶ τῆς φυγῆς, φύζα δὲ ἐπὶ τῆς μετὰ δειλίας φυγῆς.”
[64] Haslam I 29.
[65] Hesychius, Lexicon 1527-128. φοβεῖ· κνίζει, διώκει. “All the entries absent from the Coisilianus but present in the papyrus are present too in Hesychius, who it is known had access, whether directly or via Diogenianus, to a fuller version of Apollonius, Haslam 1982 37.
[66] O 415/Zs  ἐείσατο δὲ (Αti)ἐπῆλθεν p. 470; O 544/Zs ἐεισάσθην: νῦν ἐπῆλθον p. 472. In the paraphrase, 415: ὁ δὲ ἕκτωρ ἀντικρὺ τοῦ αἴαντος ἐφάνη τοῦ ἐν δόξου; and 544: οὗτοι μὲν ὥρμσαν τὰ σιδηρᾶ ὅπλα ἀπὸ τῶν ὤμων.
[67] Dindorf 312:2.215;319:9.545 and ;332:12.103&118.
[68] Bekker, 62.26.
[69] O 104/Z Zs p. 462.
[70] Bekker 111.9.
[71] Dindorf 321:10.101; 332:12.59; and 337:15.491.
[72] Bekker 55.12, γνωτόν ἀδελφόν. καὶ πληθυντικῶς “γνωτοί τε γνωταί τε.”
[73] At 3.174, the word appears in the masculine plural. It then appears six times in the masculine singular and once in the masculine plural.
[74] 15. 48, 92, 200, 471, 684.
[75] Bekker 24.22, ἀμείβεσθαι ἐπὶ μὲν τοῦ λόγον ἀνταποδιδόναι “ἀμείβετο φώνησέν τε,” ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ κατὰ μέρος “οἱ μὲν ἀμειβόμενοι φυλακὰς ἔχον,” ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦ ἐναλλάσσειν “ὃς πρὸς Τυδείδην Διομήδεα τεύχε' ἄμειβεν.” See Hesychius 109 for comparison.
[76] Ludwich 515-516.
[77] Kappe (4) calls for a similar study, “Sollte sich bei weiteren Verlgeichen das Resultat ergeben, dass der Text, den der Paraphrast benutzte, in wesentlichen Punkten von unserem Texte einerseits unds von den Scholien und Handschriften andererseits verschieden ist, so hätten wir unserer Paraphrase eine neue, bisher noch nicht benutzte Quelle für die Textkritik der Ilias.”
[78] Schironi 22.
[79] Robertson 1146, “Jannaris observes how these postpositive particles (γέ, δή, μέν, πέρ, τοί and their compounds) tend in the later Greek either to disappear or become prepositive.”
[80] Blomqvist 77.
[81] Blomqvist 100.
[82] Blomqvist 132.


