
## Review of previous scholarship ##


Recent scholarship, particularly by Dickey, Montanari, and Nünlist, has worked to elucidate the meaning and style behind the prose of these commentators. Within these contemporary studies, the texts available to ancient scholars have been suggested, and their interests in the works have been revealed.[^5]  These studies have also illuminated the variety of sources used and quoted by the ancient critics. Because of the breadth of the corpus, the question of how to read it arises. That is to say, there remains the question of what portions of the vast body of work are to be read with each other and with the text itself. Montanari makes the argument for a contextual reading, “We will define a corpus of scholia as an exegetic corpus variorum, designed to be made up in an orderly way alongside or around the text commented upon.”[^6] Scholia that appear together should be read together and not necessarily as separate registers. As Montanari suggests, the ancient critics were working with a particular instantiation of the text, both of the work and of the scholiastic/glossographic material.


Contemporary scholarship on scholia and generally scholiastic material has tended to separate the scholia both from each other and from their context. To some degree, this decision has been a practical one. A scholar can only work on so much, so choices must be made. Access to the primary sources has been limited, so producing a readable text, again, requires certain pieces to be the focus of study. Composite texts of scholia, such as the editions of Hartmut Erbse and Helmut van Thiel, have offered access to texts culled from a spectrum of manuscripts that otherwise would have been inaccessible to all but the most advanced scholars.[^7] The traditional approach is not, however, without problem. The approach treats scholia as stable texts, so that spurious material is winnowed out. Because the ultimate point of these texts were as commentaries and reading aids, they were susceptible, more than other texts, to introductions and subtractions, based on the needs and opinions of the scribe. Nonetheless, the manuscripts have not read as artifacts, preserving one compilation of texts. The various groups of scholia are broken up based on modern analyses and classification, without much regard for the tradition of transmission.[^8] The separation and re-integration create problems for proper contextual readings. The various materials are integrated on the page of manuscripts, so that they can be read together. Although the volume of text has been prohibitive in achieving this sort of Gesamtwerk, the total reading offers the scholiastic material in their optimal context. 	